Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lobs. And today I'm
joined by Dr Andrew Coy. He is an assistant
teaching professor of Philosophy at Arizona State University. He
works primarily at the intersection of moral philosophy, moral
psych theology and metaphysics on issues surrounding free will
and moral responsibility. And today we're focusing mostly on
moral responsibility, punishment, forgiveness and other related topics. So
Dr Currie, welcome to the show. It's a big
pleasure to have you.
Thank you. I'm very happy to be here. Thank
you for inviting me.
OK. So I would like to start with this
question that is sort of related to moral responsibility
in a way, but we have this common idea
that agents can be blame worthy only for acts
that are morally wrong. But is the, is there
any issue with that claim?
Good. Yeah. So I guess I'll start by saying
a little bit about how I and many philosophers
kind of understand these kinds of notions. Um So,
so first of all, we have rightness and wrongness
and these are typically understood to be like evaluations
of actions. So murder is wrong. That's a kind
of action, it's kind of normative or ethical status
is that it's wrong um giving to charity when
you can easily do so and it will create
some good in the world is the right sort
of thing to do. So again, that's a kind
of action. And then the idea is that it's
normative or ethical status is that if it's right
morally, right? And so there's different views on what
makes right acts right or wrong acts wrong. So
for example, many of you will have heard of
the theory of utilitarianism. So utilitarianism says that here's
what makes an act right? It produces the most
overall happiness. Um And then there's other sorts of
views kind of common going views for rightness and
wrongness. So another is virtue, ethics frequently associated with
Aristotle. And then cons moral philosophy is another account
of what makes right act right or wrong acts
wrong. So moral responsibility, by contrast, which I take
to be the extent to which someone is blame
worthy or praiseworthy. This is a different sort of
evaluation. So rather than targeting like an action most
fundamentally, it targets people or say agents beings with
a capacity for action. Um So more responsibility than
is kind of commonly construed in terms of the
appropriateness of certain reactive attitudes. Um That's a phrase
that goes back to 1/20 century 20th century philosopher
named PF Strauss. So if someone's blame worthy, well,
then they're worthy of blame or blaming attitudes. And
these are attitudes like resentment, indignation or in the
first personal case, guilt. Um On the other hand,
if someone is praiseworthy, then they're worthy of different
sort of attitudes by praising attitudes, gratitude appreciation, things
like this. So that's kind of how I understand
rightness and wrongness on the one hand, and then
blame worthiness and praiseworthiness. On the other hand, so
that claim that you mentioned kind of links blame
worthiness very closely with wrongness. So it says that
only wrong acts can be blameworthy, which is to
say that wrongness is a necessary condition of blameworthiness.
Blame worthiness is limited to wrong acts. And so
the problem for me with that kind of claim
is that because these are just kind of fundamentally
different sorts of evaluations, what matters for blameworthiness isn't
necessarily what matters for wrongness. And if you link
them very tightly in that way, then it turns
out that blame worthiness can be affected by factors
that it seems like shouldn't be able to affect
it. And then that gives rise to what I
would call a problematic form of moral luck. So
the idea here to kind of illustrate and give
some concrete cases here. So I think, I think
it's possible that there's cases in which a person
is blameworthy, but they didn't do anything wrong. So
that would be uh what philosophers call a counterexample
to that principle or that claim that you mentioned
initially. So for a first sort of case, we
might imagine a case in which someone acts with
sinister motives or morally criticized motives, but kind of
by luck gets it right. They accidentally get it
right. So, for one of many examples, we can
kind of cook up, imagine someone who's involved in
a road rage incident. Right. So someone cuts them
off, they get flooded with anger and they shoot
and kill the p the driver that cut them
off, right? Clearly a blame worthy action, right? But
it could turn out that the person who died
was unbeknownst to the killer, like a serial killer,
right? So it's like good that the person was
killed because they would have gone on to say
commit many more murders. So at least on some
accounts of rightness and wrongness, like on utilitarianism, that
act would be counted as right. And so if
we accept that common claim, then we could not
say that the person is blameworthy for that road
rage incident. But intuitively that seems incorrect. And then
for a second sort of case, I think there
is, I think we can think of cases in
which a person again acts with sinister, morally critic,
sizeable motives, but knowingly does the right thing. So
it's like they know they are doing the right
thing, they know it's the right thing, but they
can still act for bad motivations. And the idea
here is that for many acts that are right
they're right because the considerations in favor of them
outweigh the considerations against them. But a person might
act just purely in virtue of the considerations that
count against the action. So for example, here, we
might imagine um a case of the sadistic pediatrician.
So this is a person who just hates kids,
wants nothing more than to cause kids pain and
thinks what career should I go into? I know
pediatrics because then I can give kids shots all
day long, hurt them and no one will suspect
a thing kind of a loophole that I found
here. So, so. Right. So the pediatrician does the
right thing by giving Children their needed shots and
vaccinations, but does so only because they want to
cause pain. And again, so here it's like, well
intuitively, I wouldn't want, I wouldn't want to be
around that person. Right. I would react to that
person with blaming attitudes and I would think that
that would be the appropriate response. Um, BUT they're
doing the right thing. Um, AND so just as
a person might be blameworthy for doing something that
isn't wrong, we kind of have the flip side
when we turn to praiseworthiness as well. So a
person might indeed be praiseworthy for doing something that
is wrong. Right. So for example, if they're reasonably
trying to do the right thing, so suppose you
give someone what you reasonably believe to be a
very needed and life saving medication. But it's been
secretly replaced with poison or maybe unbeknownst to you,
the person has a fatal allergy to that medication.
There's nothing, no way that you could have known.
Um, SO in that sort of case still, it
seems like to me, the person's worthy and maybe
a praising attitudes, even though what they did wasn't
right, at least on many moral theories, many theories
of rightness and wrongness. Um, AND so the lesson
that I take from thinking about these sorts of
cases is that for me, what matters for blame
worthiness and praiseworthiness is really like exclusively a person's
internal psychological states, their character, their motives, their values,
these sorts of things. But on most moral theories,
rightness and wrongness are not exclusively a function of
the person, the agents, internal psychological state. So it's
not true on utilitarianism, that's not true in virtue
ethics. Arguably it's not true on consent, moral theory
as well. Um And so instead for these, for
many of these theories anyways, what matters for rightness
and wrongness is some other things, some effect out
in the world. At least it's not only a
person's internal psychological states. So I defend kind of
an internalist. And so given, given those, given those
facts, then linking blame worthiness very tightly to wrongness
will lead to what I call problematic forms of
moral luck. And so this is when blame worthiness
can be affected by factors that are from the
agent's perspective, just a matter of luck. Um, SO
for example, right. For the road raging driver. Um,
IT'S just a matter of luck that the victim
turned out to be a serial killer. So it
seems like that fact shouldn't be able to affect
the blame worthiness of that person.
Mhm. Yes. So, uh, yeah, I was just about
to ask you because you mentioned the three biggest
moral theories out there. I think we could call
them. There is virtue, ethics, utilitarianism slash consequentialism and
deontology or cant ethics. And uh I was just
trying, as you were talking, I was trying to
remember if any of them had any add, something
specific to say about internal states and intentionality and
motives and all of that. And of course, the
consequentialist slash the utilitarians, I don't think they even
care about that at all. Uh They can remember
because I, I can't really remember a precise uh
for example, book or author of, of any of
those big moral theories that really talks much about
uh internal states. Am I wrong here or not?
So, it's sometimes addressed by some of these theories.
So um I think John Stuart Mill who is
one of the famous defenders of utilitarianism, um kind
of like agree or seems to make some comments,
suggesting some degree of agreement with kind of the
line of thought that I'm developing. So um so
Mill says that the consequences matter very much or
determine the rightness or wrongness of the action, but
they don't kind of directly matter for the moral
worth of the person. So, in so far as
by moral worth, you mean something like moral responsibility,
then he, as one defender of utilitarianism might be
willing to, he might not want to accept that
claim that only wrong acts can be blameworthy. Um,
A kind of big theme of deontology, deontological accounts
of moral responsibility and moral worth is that it's
about doing the right thing for the right reasons.
And so that's kind of one step in the
direction of thinking that what matters for responsibility is
your motivations. But in so far as, you know,
that's kind of an expression of this idea that
only, uh, not all right acts are praiseworthy, but
praiseworthiness is limited to right acts. And so in
so far as, and I'm not a content expert.
So I'm, you know, I'm not totally sure whether
I have the right interpretation of content ethics. Um
But in so far as the ge ontological theory
does not say that the right thing is limited
to or the factors that determine rightness or wrongness
are not limited to our internal psychological states, then
you'll get this problem that I'm kind of suggesting.
Yeah, I was also asking you that because it
seems to me that at least when I hear
these big ethicists talk about what's morally good or
bad, they tend to focus a lot on the
acts themselves. I mean, either the consequences are of
the acts or the acts themselves based on some
a priori values, for example. But it's mostly about
the acts and if the person herself had some
good or bad intention as, uh, as long as
they did what's morally right to do. I mean,
they don't seem to care much about intentionality, motives
and stuff like that.
Yeah, I think that's right. And, you know, their
focus is, I think a different sort of thing
than as someone who works on responsibility, what my
focus is. So, you know, there, if someone does
something good, if they add value to the world,
say, by saving lives or producing some good effect
out there, then they might be willing to stop
their inquiry into the responsibility of the person. They're
like, well, good goodness was produced. So we might
not have any interest in pursuing the question of
responsibility further at that point.
Mhm. And so are there, uh, any traditionally, let's
say in ethics and people focused, um, much on
moral responsibility itself or, or is that a more
recent, uh, issue that people care about?
Yeah, that's a, that's a good question. So, I
mean, so discussion of responsibility kind of historically is
tied up with the free Will debate. So that
debate has been, you know, going on for 3000
years. Um, AND one way to think of free
will is that it's the sense of control that
moral responsibility requires it's whatever kind of control we
would have to have if we were to be
morally responsible for our actions. So a lot of
the interest kind of in the free will debate,
um I think is generated from interest and uh
responsibility or interpersonal relations, whether punishment makes sense. Um
There's been kind of, I guess in the second
half of the 20th century with, um, this paper
by PF Strauss, which is called freedom and resentment.
There is kind of renewed interest in looking at
moral responsibility and kind of directly looking at it
um somewhat apart from what interest we might have
in free will. And so I would say that
there's been a bit of a resurgence in looking
at responsibility kind of directly since then.
Yeah. And I mean, it's not that people in
human societies haven't been caring about attributing moral responsibility,
either praise or blame for a very, very long
time, I guess as far as we exist uh
uh as humans, right? So I was just trying
to understand this really when it comes to the
philosophers themselves, how much they've been interested in this
specific topic traditionally?
Yeah, many, so many, I mean, many historical philosophers
will say something or other about it. So K
does have an account of moral worth, kind of
I was uh describing earlier that uh for an
act to have more worthy to be praised where
you must do the right thing from the right
reasons. Um So you get, so there are elements
of it kind of throughout the history of philosophy.
So moving on to a sort of relate comes
to criminal attempts specifically, I mean, uh sometimes it
seems that, uh really, for example, in the case
of murder, really committing murder or just attempting murder,
but unsuccessfully, sometimes it's a matter of luck. So
do you think that when it comes to thinking
about punishing people, uh, that really matters? I mean,
because sometimes if you attempted murder, but you just
ended up not killing the person out of luck.
I mean, do you think that should really matter
when evaluating those cases?
Yeah, good. So you kind of brought up, um,
what's known as the problem of criminal attempts or
the puzzle of criminal attempts? So, as a kind
of starting point here, right, in most penal systems
across the world, right? Murder gets punished much more
severely than attempted murder, right? In the US. If
you're committed, if you're convicted of first degree murder,
you might face the death penalty. Um, WHILE on
the other hand, right, if you're convicted of attempted
murder, you might get a much more lenient sentence
of 1015 years. Um, POSSIBLY something like that, the
big difference, the punishment you're kind of eligible for.
Um, BUT then it seems like success or failure
is often just up to, is a matter of
luck, right? Whether the intended victim happened to be
wearing a bulletproof vest underneath their suit, the skill
of the surgeons attending to the victim, right? The
surgeons are like super good. They might save the
life of the intended victim. And then there is
no murder and it's just attempted murder. Um And
then kind of a influential example coming from Thomas
Nagel in a paper called Moral Luck. He introduced
this idea that maybe after the trigger is pulled,
a bird flies into the path of the bullet
intercepts the bullet and the victim is spared. So
it seems like whether a murderous attempt is successful
or unsuccessful can often come down to luck. And
I might even argue, always comes down to luck
and then to kind of broaden the scope of
the problem, we can notice that it's not just
uh consequences or results that are attempted in which
you have the same problem, right? So negligent drivers
or drunk drivers who kill, get much more severe
punishment than equally negligent drivers who don't or drunk
drivers who don't. Um But again, whether there's like
a pedestrian in the road as the driver cns
by is not something that's in their control. So
it's a matter of luck as far as the
driver is concerned. So, so the problem is a
little bit bigger than just attempts, although the literature
itself, uh kind of cashes this out in terms
of attempts. Um So then this raises the question,
right? Um, ARE the successful, more blame worthy, are
successful murderers in general, more blame worthy than they
are given that success or failure. Seems like it
can come down to luck or negligent drivers who
kill more blame worthy than equally negligent drivers who
don't. And so they kind of get a grip
on this question and to try and engage this
question. Um KIND of philosophers like to run thought
experiments which are um you know, kind of analogous
to a scientific experiment. So we try and kind
of hold all factors fixed that we don't want
to test for. We just wiggle the test factor
and we see if it makes a difference in
our experiment. So if we want to know whether
results or consequences matter, then we can compare two
cases in which everything is exactly the same. Except
for this one thing, whether the result materializes and
if altering, whether the result occurs leads to kind
of a change in our judgment of blameworthiness. Um
THEN that's some evidence that results matter for blameworthiness.
And if you don't get any change in blame
worthiness, when you compare these cases while wiggling whether
the result occurs or not, then that would be
some evidence that results don't matter for blame worthiness.
So uh to do this, we can like imagine
a case in which an assassin um very carefully
aims his rifle at some intended victim, pulls the
trigger. So there there's the attempt, it's a completed
attempt. And then in the first scenario it's just
kind of a regular case with no funny business
and the victim is shot and killed. But in
the second scenario, again, the triggers already been pulled.
So all factors up to and including the like
the movement of the finger are identical across the
two cases. And the second scenario, imagine that a
bird flies into the path of the bullet and
intended victim is spared harm. So if you kind
of reflect on this case, and you try to
imagine it vividly um for many people and including
myself, it's highly intuitive that they're equally blameworthy. And
uh some experimental philosophers have kind of run experiments
and surveys testing this kind of judgment. It's a
fairly robust judgment that people have. Um YOU know,
an idea here is, well, how could the mere
presence of the bird make a difference to the
south and blame worthiness, right? Like it doesn't seem
like he could cite that factor as a genuine
mitigating or excusing factor. He's like, well, there was
a bird in the path of the bullet. You
shouldn't be so mad at me, right? That seems
incorrect. Um So regardless of the presence or absence
of the bird, right, the assassin has the same
morally objection of all motives. And if you think
that therefore they're equally blame worthy, kind of as
I do, then that's to reject what foster call
resultant moral luck. And so resultant moral luck exists,
if the mere results of our actions can affect
blame worthiness. And then this kind of line of
thought suggests that they can't. Ok. So that's kind
of moral responsibility. And now how does this relate
back to punishment? So, um, so one view of
punishment is called retributive is, and on that view,
punishment is about giving people what they deserve and
what they deserve is proportional to their blame worthiness.
So, retributive is links deserve punishment to blame worthiness.
And then if we reject resultant moral luck, as
I think we should and accept retributive is about
punishment, which I'm actually kind of not sure about.
Um, THEN yes, equal attempts should be punished equally
regardless of success. Um And notice here that the
kind of primary motivation for this position is this
rejection of results and moral luck. Um If there
were resultant moral luck, right? If that, if that
was a genuine feature of the Norman landscape, if
it did exist, then it's easy to see why
we should punish success more than failure, right? Because
the successful just are more blame worthy than the
unsuccessful, purely in virtue of their success. So it
seems like this debate about criminal attempts, um largely
comes down to a debate about resultant moral luck.
Mhm. But if we reach the conclusion philosophically that
uh the attempted uh uh the people who attempted
murder but were unsuccessful are as blame worthy as
the successful murderers. Do you think that should necessarily
have legal ramifications I mean, ho how basically do
you look at the relationship between the work done
by moral philosophers and ethicists and the legal and
penal system?
Yeah. So I think moral philosophy has the luxury
of being able to be ideal. Whereas uh thinking
about punishment and actually like legal punishment is has
to engage with kind of realities of the world,
right? Such as like, can you implement that system?
Um HOW cost effective is it? So, so that's
why I say like it kind of depends on
whether you accept this view of punishment called retributive
is which just kind of directly links deserved punishment
with blameworthiness. Um BUT we might not accept um
retributive and then, you know, some other factors that
might play into it is it could turn out
to be empirically true that uh as a matter
of fact, success is pretty good evidence for more
blameworthy psychological states. And so there's a strong enough
correlation in the real world that would justify punishing
success in general more than mere attempted murder. So
it depend on these other kind of factors, I
think.
Yeah, also because I was just thinking that uh
we're focusing mostly on retributive is here. But uh
and a possible alternative would be what people have
been calling restorative justice, right? And I, I'm not
sure I haven't looked into that sort of literature,
I'm not sure to what extent it works and
in what specific cases it works or not, but
perhaps at least in, uh, in the case of
an attempted unsuccessful murder, there would at least be
some more space, hypothetical space there for restorative justice
because at least the potential victim is still, or
would be still alive.
Yeah. Yeah, I think that, yeah, I think that's
right. So, and again, that's kind of to, to
say that there's stuff, there's factors beyond, um, the
blame, that facts, other than the blame worthiness, facts
might determine what kind of punishment is appropriate, right?
So, if the victim is still alive, then there
might be some possibility for a restorative process there.
Mhm And so I would like for you to
tell us now a bit about this idea of
the penal lottery. So what is this about?
Yeah. So for a bit of background here, um
so the idea of a penal lottery comes from
David Lewis, um who is one of the kind
of most influential 20th century analytic philosophers um widely
known for his work in Metaphysics um developing uh
semantics for possible worlds, this kind of idea of
thinking about modality in, in terms of possible worlds.
And he's also done some very interesting work in
philosophy of law and ethics. So he wrote this
paper in 1989 or is published in 1989 called
The Punishment that leaves something to chance where he
takes up the problem of criminal attempts. And he
defends the idea that it makes sense to punish
success more than failure, even if the successful are
not necessarily more blameworthy than unsuccessful. Like even if
you reject result of moral luck, as I've kind
of indicated my sympathies towards. So just as a
little bit of personal background. So I came across
this paper maybe 10 years or so ago when
I was teaching a course and I just thought
this is the most clever thing I've ever seen.
And at that point, I was already kind of
convinced that because equal attempts are equally blameworthy, they
should be punished equally. Let me just so I
have motion activated lights that drive me crazy every
day. No problem. Um So, so Lewis's argument gave
me real pause about my own view. I was
like, oh gosh, I have, I've been wrong about
this. And so I got kind of obsessed with
it trying to see if the argument was sound
or if there is a problem somewhere. And then
I also recommend for interested viewers. I highly recommend
that paper as just a kind of fun, lively
and engaging piece of philosophy. Ok. So what is
the penal lottery? So imagine that two criminals make
equal murderous attempts. Um And suppose that they subject
their victim to a 50% chance of death and
to kind of make this precise imagine that they
both kind of engage in this grim game of
Russian roulette where they load three bullets into their
six shooter revolver. They spin the cylinder and pull
the trigger while aiming it at an innocent victim.
So it's clear that there's a 50% risk of
death. And in one case, suppose that the victim
dies. In the other case, the hammer of the
gun lands on an empty chamber and the victim
is spared harm. And then suppose that they're both
tried and convicted um of this attempt of subjecting
their victim the intended victim to a 50% chance
of death. Ok. So how are we going to
punish them for, for the attempt crucially for Lewis.
So Lewis imagines the possibility that we punish them
for the attempt itself with a penal lottery in
which they have to face the exact same risk
that they subjected their victim to. So he imagines
this kind of grim game of drawing straws. So
on, on the steps of the gallows, the criminal
must draw straws and if a short straw is
drawn, put to death, if they get a long
straw, they're released. Um And the idea here is
that we tailor the odds that the criminal face
in this penal lottery to the odds of harm
that they subjected the victim to. So because they
were both convicted of subjecting their victim to a
50% chance of death. Well, then we from the
bundle of straws, there's going to be five short
straws and five long straws. So it's a 50%
chance then that they get executed if however, they
were convicted of subjecting their victim to a 60%
risk of harm. Well, then we just add, you
know, we take one long straw and cut it.
And so then there's six short straws and four
lung. So suppose that the first draws a short
straw, um, and the second draws a long straw.
So the first is put to death, the second
is released. Ok. So now we can ask, so
that's the penal lottery. Now we ask is that
just is has that served justice? And Lewis's point
is that, well, it kind of seems like it
does uh kind of met out retributive justice. And
even if you think that the two criminals are
equally blame worthy, even if you reject resultant moral
luck, right? They both face the same penal lottery
with the same odds. And so there's a kind
of a clear sense in which the penal lottery
respects the retributive principle of Lex Talionis or an
eye for an eye tooth for a tooth. Ok.
So that's the regular penal lottery. And then Lewis
goes through a series of cases where he makes
some alterations to the lottery but says it doesn't
matter, doesn't make a difference to whether the lottery
is just or unjust. This is like the really
clever bit, I think. So in the initial case,
the drawing of straws occurs after we held the
trial and after the criminals were convicted of making
that attempt. Um But Lewis notices that we could
just, we could also hold the drawing before the
trial. Right. We just, we do the drawing of
straws before the trial and then we hold the
trial to see whether the criminal is convicted. And
if they are convicted, then they have to face
the lottery according to which, which straw was drawn,
I think. Well, look if, if a short straw
is drawn before the trial, then why would we
even bother carrying out the trial? There'd be no
point because, right, if the, if the alleged criminal
is not convicted, they're released and if they are
convicted, they're released. So either way it doesn't matter.
And the solution here for Lewis is to make
the lottery what he calls impure. So instead of
freedom for the winners, you give them a short
prison sentence, you don't give them death like you
do if they draw the short straw, but you
give them a little bit of punishment. Ok. And
again, Lewis thinks at this stage that, that change
from a pure lottery to an impure lottery doesn't
affect kind of fundamentally whether the lottery is just
or not just. And then the next step in
a series of cases is to a device, right?
So there's nothing um it, it doesn't have to
be drawing of straws, right? It could be some
other way to conduct the lottery like you could
roll a dice. Um, IF the odds were 5050
you could flip a coin, right? And that wouldn't
seem to make a difference as to whether the
lottery was just or unjust. And then, so Lewis
suggests that instead of drawing straws, we could employ
what he calls a reenactment of the crime. So
the thought here is like we hold a play
in which we have actors and they reenact kind
of the events of the crime. And then we
look to see what results happened in the reenactment.
So if the victim in the reenactment dies and
the criminal has lost his lottery and is therefore
put to death if the victim in the reenactment
survives, and the criminal has won his lottery and
gets a short prison sentence and notice here that
if you, if you get the reenactment, perfect might
be hard to do. But if you get it
perfect, then the odds of harm in the reenactment
will perfectly match up with the odds of harm
in the actual criminal event itself. Ok? But of
course, this doesn't seem very practical, right? It's going
to be hard to hold a reenactment, let alone
a perfect reenactment. And here's like the punch line
for Lewis. Um, WELL, just look, here's an easy
solution. Just replace reenactment with enactment. Just use the
actual criminal event as its own lottery. Um So
if the actual victim dies, then the criminal has
lost his lottery and if the actual victim survives
and the criminal has won his lottery and here
we get a perfect match in those odds just
by default because we just have one event that's
playing two roles. Right. It's the criminal event for
which the criminal is being punished, but it's also
its own lottery event. And then the, this final
case we would set is just the current system.
That's what we have. Um, IT'S an impure penal
lottery by enactment. Um, SO we can understand the
current system along these lines. And then he thinks
if we do, it's not obvious that it's unjust,
right. So he thinks you start with that the
first penal lottery case in which they draw straws
on the steps of the gallows. And you say,
well, that doesn't seem obviously wrong. It's at least
tricky to say why that would be unjust. And
he thinks that same judgment transfers down to each
of these cases, the final case just being the
current system. Um So he thinks it makes sense
or at least it doesn't obviously not make sense
to punish success more than failure, even if the
successful are not necessarily more blameworthy than unsuccessful. So
that's, so that's Lewis's um argument um for uh
the justice of the kind of current system that
appeals to the penal lottery. Um So what's the
problem with it? Is there a problem with it?
So, in Lewis's paper, it kind of gets buried
within some of the technical details related to different
notions of risk or probability. But the basic issue
is that it requires that the severity of the
punishment that is deserved is simply a matter of
the objective risk imposed on the victim. Because only
then could we use the criminal event itself as
its own lottery? But I think it's not plausible
that objective risk imposed. Um KIND of is what
determines blame worthiness or criminal dessert. So for one,
epistemic considerations seem to clearly matter, right? So if
you believe that the guns loaded and you pull
the trigger, but someone has secretly replaced all the
bullets with blanks, um This greatly reduces the objective
risk of harm, right? Maybe from like 100% to
0%. But it doesn't, at least if you have
that intuition that we should reject resulted more luck.
It seems like it doesn't directly affect the blame
worthiness of the person, right? That person still tried
to um to cause a murder or to cause
a killing. So the problem is that the objective
risk imposed, which for Lewis determines the severity of
the penal lottery that the criminal has to face
is just as much a matter of luck as
his success or failure. So I think that Lewis
has not delivered on his promise to offer us
an explanation of why it makes sense to punish
success more severely than failure. That doesn't just kind
of directly appeal to the existence of Resultant Morlock,
which is like very a very controversial claim in
the debate, um, because, or at least something close
enough to result in moral luck, like luck and
objective risk imposed.
Mhm. So, I would like to ask you a
little bit about forgiveness now and obviously the only
people we can forgive are the blame worthy. I
mean, it wouldn't make sense to forgive the praiseworthy
because there's nothing to forgive but since, uh, but,
but it seems that there might be some problem
there because the blame worthy are the ones that
are appropriately blamed and not forgiven. So what, how
do we deal with this issue?
Yeah. So that's exactly right. So I like these,
I like kind of philosophical puzzles or paradox kind
of in the way that you're just suggesting I
found the idea of forgiveness to be kind of
puzzling or paradoxical. So there's some people have argued
that there's a full blown paradox of forgiveness and
it's kind of like just what you were saying.
So it seems like forgiveness has to have a
point, right? You haven't done anything bad to me.
And if I were like, Ricardo, I forgive you,
you would just be like, what are you talking
about? That doesn't make any sense. So it seems
like forgiveness has to be directed at the blame
worthy, right? For forgiveness to have a point has
to be directed at the blame worthy. But if
a person's blame worthy, well, then they're worthy of
blame and forgiveness is not blaming or ceasing to
blame. Um SO, if a person is blame worthy,
then it seems like they, that blame is justified,
not forgiveness. Um And so the conclusion here is
just that appropriate forgiveness is impossible, like never occurs.
Um Only the blame worthy can be appropriately forgiven,
but the blame worthy are worthy of blame, not
forgiveness. So, in some of my work, I've so
how, so how do we deal with this paradox
of or puzzle of forgiveness? Um So in some
of my work, I've drawn a distinction between what
I call synchronic and diachronic responsibility or synchronic and
what one form of which is synchronic and diachronic
blame worthiness. So the idea here is that say
seeing chronic blameworthiness is a person's blame worthiness for
an action at the time of its occurrence, like
at that moment and then diachronic blameworthiness is a
person's blame worthiness for an action at some time
after. So any time that we're considering the question
of a person's blame worthiness for something in the
past, this is going to be a question of
diachronic blame worthiness. So they have these different temporal
dimensions. So, synchronic blame worthiness is blame, blame worthiness
at the time of the action. While diachronic blameworthiness
kind of stretches out over time. So it's blameworthiness
now for something in the past or blame worthiness
at a later time or an action at an
earlier time. So that's the, that's the distinction and
um many philosophers would think that this is a
distinction that doesn't make a difference because they think
that blameworthiness can never diminish over time. So if
that's true, then diachronic blame worthiness would always be
exactly equal testing, chronic blame worthiness for an action.
Um And so they think that because I think
they think that the past can't be changed, um
which is correct and that your blame worthiness is
set in stone, which that part I reject. So
I think that blame worthiness can diminish and extinguish
over time. So diachronic blame worthiness for a given
act might come apart from synchronic blame worthiness for
that act. So as an analogy to kind of
get a grip on the sort of distinction I
have in mind here. Um So here's one property
that I have. So I have the property of
being from California. Um I'm not in California, I'm
in Arizona, uh adjacent to California and then Southwester
United States. Um But I still have the property
of being from California, right? But no matter where
I go in the world or how old I
get, I will still have that property. It's sticky,
I can't lose it and it's robust, it doesn't
diminish. I will always have that property can't lose
it and I'll always have it to the same
degree. So that's one kind of property that people
have. But here's another sort of property, consider the
product is not sticky and robust in the way
the property of being from California is right. So
the property of being a fast swimmer is when
that does diminish over time, right? As people age.
Um AND it can ultimately ultimately be lost, right?
You can lose the ability to swim at all.
So the property of being a fast swimmer is
a property that can clearly change over time, it
can diminish and even fully extinguish over time. So
then the question is, which category does the property
of being blame worthy fall into? And on my
view, um the property of being blameworthy is more
like the property of being a fast swimmer than
it is the property of being from California. So
in my view, um blame worthiness can change depending
on can change over time, depending on what one
is like just in the same way that being
a fast swimmer can change over time depending on
one's physical abilities. And so if we appeal, if
we kind of have this distinction in our toolbox,
then I think we can use it to resolve
the kind of puzzle of forgiveness. So while it's
true that we can only forgive those who were
blameworthy, those who were syn chronically blame worthy at
some earlier point in time, they might not now
be blameworthy at all. Um And if they're not
now blameworthy, then we should no longer blame them.
And for me that counts as forgiveness. Um So
they should be forgiven. So on this approach, um
appropriate forgiveness is a matter of kind of tracking
blame worthiness across time and someone who becomes not
blame worthy for a past act is someone who
deserves or warrants forgiveness?
And how about the notion of repentance? Do you
think it would apply here? At least to the
extent that particularly particular morally wrong acts would be,
uh, I mean, people would consider people able to
repent for them because of course, there are some
acts that perhaps people consider that the person, the
blame worthy person went too far and there's no
possible repentance there, but at least for the acts
that people can repent for. Do you think it
would apply here?
Yeah. Yeah. So, so the notion of repentance is
kind of closely bound up with the idea of
forgiveness. And the idea here is that kind of
intuitively. Um It seems like repentance if someone genuinely
repents, um then it seems like that is that
provides some reason, moral reason or reason of the
right kind to forgive. So it's like if someone
repents, that's a good reason to consider maybe forgiving
them. Um And so why, why would repentance have
that kind of normative power? And so my answer
to that is that when we genuinely repent, um
one changes psychologically in ways that just directly reduce
blame worthiness. So the idea is that repentance just
directly reduces blame worthiness. So why is that? Well,
repentance involves breaking certain psychological connections with one's past
self as one way to put it. Um YOU
kind of dissolve the motivations and the values that
led to the initial act in question. Um You
might no longer if the genuinely repentant presumably are
people who are no longer disposed to act in
those bad ways anymore. And so on my view,
um that just directly and straightforwardly makes the person
less diachronic blame worthy for the earlier action, right,
in the same way that losing the ability to
move your legs might just directly reduce the extent
to which you're a fast swimmer. So the repentant
then deserve forgiveness simply because they've become less blameworthy
for the past action. And so I think this
makes sense. I mean, for me, it seems intuitively
plausible and again, we can like run a thought
experiment here, right? If you compare the repentant to
some, if you compare a case in which someone
is genuinely repentant for some bad act, and you
compare that to another case where the person committed
exactly the same sort of initial act, but they
are not repentant. It seems like obvious that the
repentant deserves less blame than the non repentant, at
least I would make that case.
Mhm. And how exactly can we determine how much
punishment someone deserves?
Yeah. So as I've kind of alluded to earlier,
I'm less confident about my views on punishment than
I am about my views on more responsibility. So
I've kind of settled views on responsibility. Um, So,
so in my view, synchronic responsibility or synchronic blame,
blame, worthiness or praiseworthiness is a matter of quality
of will. This is a phrase, another phrase that
comes from PF Strauss essay, freedom and resentment. So
quality of will for me is a matter of
the internal psychological states of the person at the
time of the action and um particular psychological states
at that time, like ones that were relevant to
why they were blameworthy in the first place. So
values and concern concerns as expressed in the action.
And so appeal to kind of these internal states
as being the determinant of synchronic blameworthiness is supposed
to provide an explanation for why resultant moral luck
doesn't exist. So it's kind of like I want
my theory of responsibility to not allow for a
resultant moral luck. And here's, here's a theory that
does that and provides I think a satisfying explanation
as to why that is so right. So the
results of our actions don't affect our motives, right?
The motives that we, because the motives occur first,
right? There's no backwards causation here. So because the
results of our actions don't affect the quality of
will with which a person acts and that's why
they can't affect responsibility. So, so the idea here
is that responsibility at the time of the action
is fully determined by your quality of will, which
is kind of the motivations that you, that you
have and then diachronic responsibility in turn is a
matter of the persistence of those psychological states across
time or the persistence of that quality of will.
So here, if we're inquiring into the question of
diachronic responsibility, we're going to be asking questions like
this. Do the values and concerns that were expressed
in the action, do those persist across time? Have
they diminished? Have they been extinguished or eliminated altogether?
So, in my view, if they persist, which they
frequently do, then blameworthiness persists undiminished. Um If those
psychological states diminish, then we're going to get a
corresponding diminishment and blameworthiness. And even in some cases,
they might be entirely eliminated in which a person
might be no longer blameworthy at all for some
earlier action that they used to be blameworthy for.
Ok. So that's, that's kind of my view on
responsibility. And then if we accept this retributive view
about punishment, where you link punishment, deserved punishment to
blame worthiness, then we can get an account of
punishment where deserved punishment for an action is kind
of tailored to one's current degree of blame worthiness
for the action. And I think that maybe that
will result in the most plausible version of retributive
is, um but kind of, as I said before,
I'm not sure whether I want, whether I want
to accept retributive is so it seems like other
sorts of factors other than blame worthiness might matter
for punishment like deterrence. Um THINGS like that.
Uh And so, uh one more question related to
punishment and then we'll move on to other things.
So, is there any amount of punishment that can
render the blame worthy, not blame worthy anymore?
Yeah. So that's, I think a really interesting question
that brings up some metaphysical issues that I think
we have to kind of have a good grasp
of if we're trying to think about responsibility and
punishment over time. So my answer is that yes,
some kinds of punishment can eliminate blame worthiness though.
It might be for sort of surprising reasons. So
suppose that there's a blameworthy person who's been convicted
of convicted of a crime and they've been sentenced
to death and they've been put to death. Ok?
And let's also assume that death is non-existent. It's
annihilation. Let's suppose for the moment anyways that there's
no afterlife. So death is just you're gone. Ok?
So if the person has been put to death,
then I think this is true. I think that
this is an undeniable metaphysical fact. Um, AFTER the
person's been put to death, there's just no one
around that is at that later time, blameworthy for
the earlier action, right? So after the person's been
put to death for the crime, if we were
to survey all the people on earth, all the
people in the world, no one would be the
person who is blameworthy for that crime, right? That
person just not around any longer. So, in this
way, I think that that just kind of necessarily
extinguish his blame worthiness as well as you know,
all our other intrinsic properties. Um And I think
that this kind of explain, like it seems like
there's a unique sort of tragedy to crimes like
murder suicides or crimes in which uh the perpetrator
of the crime dies in the crime or shortly
after. Right. So there's something uniquely tragic about that.
And I think this is why right, The person
is just not around to be held responsible and
that is disappointing to us. So if blame worthiness
is extinguished, kind of necessarily when the person no
longer persists or when the person no longer exists.
Then to me, this suggests that persisting blame worthiness
is a matter of the persistence of something or
other about the person. So on some views, it's
simply a matter of whether the person itself persist
through time, that is whether the person is still
alive or not. Um This is turns out to
be a matter of what philosophers call the question
of personal identity over time, what makes a person
the same person over time? Um So on that
view, blame worthiness, persists undiminished so long as the
person still persists or still alive. Um So on
that view, the property of being blame worthy is
like the property or my property of being from
California. It's not one you can lose, you will
retain it up until you go out of existence.
Um Now I don't accept that view because I
think that people can persist but yet change in
ways that are relevant to blame worthiness. So if
you kind of dig into the literature on personal
identity, it turns out that on all the leading
accounts of personal identity, personal identity is compatible, not
just with a great deal of change, but with
complete psychological change. Like with, it's compatible with not
retaining any of your psychological states whatsoever. So long
as it's gradual enough, this turns out to be
true on both like biological and psychological approaches to
personal identity. Um So in my view, persisting blame
worthiness, instead of being a matter of the persistence
of the person as construed by these accounts of
personal identity. Um IT'S a matter of the persistence
of certain aspects of their psychology, right? So if
the morally deficient values and concerns that explain why
the person was initially blame worthy, persist and blame
worthiness persists if they've diminished, then blameworthiness has diminished.
And if they've been eliminated, then so too is
blameworthiness? Ok. And then back to the issue of
punishment in so far as punishment might affect those
psychological states, like whether the person has those values
or concerns and then punishment can affect blame worthiness.
So the relation here is going to be kind
of indirect. So that's what I think is going
on in the case of death or in the
case of punishment by the death penalty, right? And
the execution just eliminates all of those psychological states.
And so there just is no one around anymore
that's blameworthy for that act. Um But it might
happen in more, less kind of extreme ways as
well. So blame worthiness could also be affected by
punishments that result in relevant psychological change as when
a criminal has been reformed or rehabilitated, such that
they no longer retain those problematic aspects of their
psychology that led to the bad action in the
first place.
Mhm. But I mean, since you mentioned the issues
surrounding personal identity there, which I am more or
less familiar uh in the term, in the way
that philosophers deal with them. I mean, because sometimes
when people improve their moral character, let's say people
uh make statements like, oh, she, she's no longer
the same person, she, she's a better person. Now,
I mean, to, to the extent that you tie
issues surrounding punishment with personal identity, would you consider
that if over time the person improves and changes
their psychological traits, the ones that are relevant here
to ethics, morality and punishment that would also constitute
a change in terms of their personal identity? Because
since we have this sort of folk intuitive psychological
approach to saying that the person is a different
person now, would that have any bearing in terms
of the moral philosophy here or not?
Yeah. Yeah. Excellent. So there's different sense. So we
mean different things when we talk or we can
mean different things when we speak of a person's
self or whether the person is the same person
or not, the same person over time, right? So
if you consider the sentence, he is not the
same person that he once was, right? The first
occurrence of he seems to imply that there is
identity that holds from the earlier time to the
later time. That's kind of the strict sense of
numerical identity. The second sense is something like a
person's, it's a looser sense of identity. Um A
person's moral self, maybe we might say, or a
person's practical self or um you know what the
person is like, what values do they have?
Yeah, perhaps in a more uh intuitive sort of
folk psychology kind of way of putting it. I
would say the essence of the person changed in
a way sometimes that's the way people think and
talk about it. Right.
Yeah. Yeah. Absolutely. So, so I would say I
do want to kind of tie responsibility to the
moral sense of self say, but I want to
divorce it from the numerical identity sense of self.
So, right, if right, if you think of like,
right, someone goes to university and they have this
kind of, you know, experience in which they kind
of like maybe reject some of the previous values
that they had, that were a result of their
upbringing and they come to kind of really find
themselves and they say I'm no longer the same
person. So that's kind of this moral sense that
has to do with kind of the psychological content
that the person has your values, your concerns and
things like that. But on the other hand, like
the legal system, when they're trying to determine, like
who did the crime, they don't care about that.
Right. If you say, well, look, that was, that
was when I went to college or that was
before I went to college before I was a
different person. But now I'm a different person that's
not going to work. So like turned off again,
that's not going to get you off the hook.
So I think both we have both these notions
that we appeal to in daily life and then,
yeah. So my, yeah, my claim is that uh
that strict sense, that kind of legal sense of
identity is not the one that's relevant to punishment.
Um What matters more is what is the person
like now? Like, are they still, do they still
have these criticized psychological states or not?
Ok. So I have two more questions here. I
mean, in fact, it's one question, but it's two
parts to the same question. So going back to
moral responsibility itself, uh when it comes to attributions
of moral responsibility, how do we determine if an
individual is blame worthy or praiseworthy?
Yeah. Yeah. So, yeah. So we, so we talked
about some of this, so So in my view,
synchronic responsibility to put my view kind of succinctly.
So on my view, synchronic responsibility is a matter
of the quality of will, the person's quality of
will at the time of action and then responsibility
across time or diachronic responsibility is a matter of
the persistence of those qualities of will.
Mhm. And do you think that uh this way
of approaching things would also apply to collectives and
not just individuals?
Yeah. So, so yes, I think that it does,
I think that this kind of basic picture can
apply to collectives as well. So, collectives are groups
of people um organized in more or less structured
ways. So like nations, governments, um corporations. So, so
I defend a kind of attitude based account of
responsibility on which responsibility is like largely a function
of the person's attitudes or psychological states and then
to kind of engage the question of collectives. Um
AS a first step, it kind of seems to
make sense to think that some collectives can have
various attitudes like beliefs, desires and values, right? So
we frequently attribute attitudes to collectives, like governments and
corporations, right? We might say that this government has
this particular goal, right? I mean, think of like
a government's platform where they're like, this is what
we want to do, right? That I think that
you can understand that as being a desire of
the collective or the beliefs of the collective, um
you know, Furthermore, like, we frequently might criticize a
corporation by saying, look, I saw that I saw
those commercials that this corporation did about carrying, you
know, they maybe washed uh an oil covered duck
with some soap. But really that corporation might not
care so much about the environment despite this pr
campaign, right? And then like mission statements which you
can find on the website of any like giant
corporation seem like their declarations of what they tell
us are their deeply held values or beliefs. Um
And then they might be kind of authentic or
inauthentic or we might raise those questions. So it
seems like at least suitably structured collectives can have
attitudes or at least a close enough analog to
attitudes like beliefs, desires, values. Um AND then they
can act on them, they can act on those
attitudes, they can act on the basis of their
beliefs. So as to realize their desires, I mean,
that's what these collectives do. Um And then some
of those attitudes might have moral content. So we
might be able to evaluate um kind of whether
we think those priorities of the collective are defensible
or indefensible. So in that sense, it seems like
collectives that collectors that have the capacity for goal
directed behavior, which requires some degree of structure, kind
of maybe a hierarchical structure. So it seems to
make sense kind of idea here is that they
can, that corporations or collectors can have a quality
of will and responsibility just is um an evaluation
of quality of will. And then just like as
with individuals, we can think about whether those qualities
of will, whether those values desires beliefs persist over
time or don't persist. Um Right. Does a corporation
still have say those problematic values or has it
turned over a new leaf? Um So I think
that the kind of the basic theoretical framework that
I've been describing um for thinking about responsibility in
terms of quality of will. I think that it
does apply to collectors as well as individuals.
Great. So um just before we go, would you
like to tell people where they can find you
and your work on the internet?
Yeah, sure. So um a good place to find
me is on Phil papers.org and you type in
my name, I have a profile there. You can
find my papers, many of which are freely available
and also find me on Google scholar as well
as my university web page or my university profile.
Mhm. Great. So I'm leaving links to that in
the description box of the interview and Doctor Curry,
thank you so much again for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a pleasure
to talk to you.
Absolutely. Thank you, Ricardo can also find me on
Google scholar as well as my university web page
or you my university profile.
Mhm. Great. So I'm leaving links to that in
the description box of the interview. And doctor Curry,
thank you so much again for taking the time
to come on the show. It's been a pleasure
to talk to you.
Absolutely. Thank you, Ricardo.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview. Until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights learning
and development. Then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno,
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam, Castle Matthew Whitting
Bear. No wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Connors, Philip
Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in NAI
Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel Stormer.
Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall, her
Ma J and Lain Jung Y and the Samuel
K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S Friends,
David Sloan Wilson Yaar, Roman Roach Diego, Jan Punter,
Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt, Pavlo Stassi
na Me, Gary G Almansa Zal Ari and YPJ
Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Broner Douglas Fry
Franka La Gilon Cortez or Solis Scott Zachary ftdw
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke Loki, Georgio,
Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David Williams, the
Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralie. Chevalier, Bangalore Fists, Larry Dey Junior, Old Ebon,
Starry Michael Bailey. Then Spur by Robert Grassy Zorn.
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple, Thomas
Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert
Jessica. No week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson
Ismael Bensley Man, George Katis, Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings David
Pins of Sea Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers, these our web,
Jim Frank Luca Stina, Tom Vig and Bernard N
Cortes Dixon Bendik, Muller Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick
Tobin, John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden.
And to my executive producers Matthew Lavender si, Adrian
Bogdan Knits and Rosie. Thank you for all.